# 🔮 3.2 Predictable

The look and feel of the entire website should be predictable.

## :blue\_book:Guides

{% embed url="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/quickref/?versions=2.2#predictable" %}
Guideline 3.2 – Predictable
{% endembed %}

## Events for manual activation only (A)

There should be no events that the user did not expect, e.g.:

* do not touch `:hover` / `:focus` with explanatory popup,
* for multi-page forms, do not go to the next page with the submit button.

All events should be initiated by the user when they are ready.

If possible, minimize the number of popups that appear at the touch of a button.

## Speak before opening a new window (A)

Let the user know in advance for links where something unexpected (not clear from the link text) occurs:

* will open in a new window,
* email client will start and a new email window will open,
* a popup will open.

This can be indicated in text or by other notation that comes not only from CSS.

## **Context switching**

### The use of any interface controls may not alter all or any part of the page without prior notice to the user. (A)

Pay special attention to the submit buttons, we will always clearly inform the user what exactly will happen after pressing them.\
E**.**g.: you submit a form, from which you will also receive an e-mail confirmation, you will jump to the next step of the form, you will be redirected to the selected page.

At the form reset button, we will clearly state what exactly is going to happen.

### Context switching can be turned off (AAA)

&#x20;Happen only if the user gives an order for it.

## Consistent navigation (AA)

The main navigation of the page that appears on each subpage should be the same and look the same.

If for some reason we have to display it elsewhere on a particular subpage (eg on a thematic landing page), it is clearly indicated that it is the same main menu.

## Consistent identification (AA)

Any item that has the same functionality should look the same.

Each text item with the same functionality contains the same text:

* label
* name
* alt text.

Elements with similar functionality should be similar to each other. E.g.:

* Each read more button on the page also includes an arrow pointing to the right.
* All links / buttons leading to the Contact Us subpage have the same Contact label.

## Consistent Help (A)

If there is a helper element on multiple pages we should put it to the same place. For example: we place a Chat button to the right bottom corner of all subpages.
