# ✍️ 3.3 Input Assistance

We need to help users make as few mistakes as possible, and if something goes wrong, they can fix it as easily as possible.

## :blue\_book:Guides

{% embed url="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/quickref/?versions=2.2#input-assistance" %}
Guideline 3.3 – Input Assistan
{% endembed %}

## Fault identification

### Where is it happened? (A)

In case of submitting an incorrect form, we will tell you in a detailed description exactly where it was corrupted (which field), what is the problem with it (e.g. its value, format, length), how the user can fix it.

To do this, we should use an element with the `aria-alertdialog` role. If possible, include the option to jump to each of the incorrect fields.

Example:

{% embed url="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/aria/ARIA18.html" %}
Using aria-alertdialog to Identify Errors
{% endembed %}

### Invalid form status (AA)

The invalid form fields should be given the `aria-invalid="true"` status property.

Example:

{% embed url="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/aria/ARIA21.html" %}
Using Aria-Invalid to Indicate An Error Field
{% endembed %}

### Inline form validation (AA)

**Also** provide inline (js or at least html5) form validation that can clearly show immediately if a field has been filled in incorrectly by the user. Validation should be not only visual but also textual!

### Inform about successful form submission (A)

If you submit a successful form, please provide clear feedback.

Example: you have successfully submitted your job application or successfully logged in/out.

## Field Descriptions (A)

**For form elements provide:**

<table data-header-hidden><thead><tr><th width="312"></th><th></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>label</td><td>The essential, informative name of the given field.</td></tr><tr><td>description</td><td>more detailed description of the field, additional information, better understanding of the role of the field</td></tr><tr><td>placeholder (for supported fields)</td><td>example text of what information we expect</td></tr></tbody></table>

{% hint style="info" %}
The label and description should be positioned so that it is clear which field they belong to.
{% endhint %}

{% hint style="warning" %}
Mark the required fields clearly and not just in color.
{% endhint %}

If you press an `X` (Close) button to close a form popup (or a back button), tell them that what you've filled out will be lost - if you don't save it. Connect the button and the description to the `aria-describedby` property.

Group the fields that are logically identical or that can be interpreted as more complex fields, and give the groups separate labels.

Also mark the required fields with the `aria-required="true"` property. **(AA)**

## Error Prevention (AA)

In the case of legal, financial and data disclosure, it is particularly important to prevent errors, so provide different tools to prevent them:

* Provide a revocation request for a successfully submitted request.
* Provide an overview page before submitting a form.
* If there is a particularly important / major consequence of pressing a submit button (eg a contract is concluded, a credit card will be debited, data will be permanently deleted from the system), please install a checkbox next to it to confirm it (activate the pressability of the submit button).
* Ensure that a delayed action is performed so that the user can still cancel it if it was started accidentally. This is especially true when deleting data.
* Before performing any important actions, write a warning message about what will happen next, asking for feedback.

## Providing Assistance (AAA)

* Create a _Help subpage_ where we gather all the information to use the website and link to this page from every other subpage.
* Provide an assistant app that allows the user to ask a robot or live person for help.
* Provide spell checking.
* Specify in which field we expect the information in which format (e.g. phone number format).
* `<input>` fields, enter help text in the `title` property that can help the user fill in correctly.
