# ⌨ 2.1 Keyboard Accessible

All functionality on the page should also be available from the keyboard. Because keyboard navigation means not only manual keyboard operation, but also additional technologies (such as voice control) that ultimately perform keyboard control in the same way, this is an essential part of accessibility!

Keyboard control means that you can access all the interaction elements on the page just as you would with a mouse. Just as you expect UX from the mouse control to get some feedback (e**.**g. `:hover`) when you are over an interactable element, this feedback is essential for keyboard navigation `:focus`!

## :blue\_book:Guides

{% embed url="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/#keyboard" %}
Guideline 2.1 – Keyboard Accessible
{% endembed %}

## All interactive elements can be controlled (A)

### Interactive elements

Only items that have the appropriate WAI-ARIA role can be controlled with the keypad.

For an HTML5 web page, each interactive element is given the correct WAI-ARIA role by default.

Each of these interactive elements gets a default tabindex property: `tabindex="0"`.

If an item is not an interactive item by default (e.g. `<div>`), you can give it an appropriate role (e.g. if it is an `<button>`: `role="push button"`).

{% hint style="warning" %}
<mark style="color:orange;">However if you can't add an interactive role but still want to make it interactive, add a tabindex property,</mark> <mark style="color:orange;"></mark><mark style="color:orange;">**you should not do it!**</mark> <mark style="color:orange;"></mark><mark style="color:orange;">Use</mark> <mark style="color:orange;"></mark><mark style="color:orange;">`tabindex`</mark> <mark style="color:orange;"></mark><mark style="color:orange;">only for interactive elements!</mark>
{% endhint %}

### `tabindex="0"`

`Tabindex ="0"` means default / auto, if you enter a value greater than / positive (such as `tabindex="2"`), the order of the default DOM will be overwritten.

We only use this as a last resort, basically prepare the DOM in the correct logical order, otherwise we can easily confuse the user / utility.

### `tabindex="-1"`

In rare cases, you can also specify `tabindex="-1"`, which makes it an interactive item, but a keyboard event will not respond, but a mouse will; accessibility is solved with JS in this case.

Make sure you can only navigate back there with the keyboard and not get stuck somewhere.

### ****:blue\_book:**Guides**

{% embed url="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/Understanding_WCAG/Keyboard" %}
Keyboard accessibility on MDN
{% endembed %}

{% embed url="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Global_attributes/tabindex" %}
tabindex on MDN
{% endembed %}

### MacOS Voice Over examples of keyboard control

| Function                                                                                    | Subfunctions   | Keystrokes                   |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------- | ---------------------------- |
| (default) VO combination                                                                    |                | `Control` + `Option`         |
| on / off                                                                                    |                | VO + `F5`                    |
| step between items                                                                          | forward        | VO + `right arrow`           |
|                                                                                             | backward       | VO + `left arrow`            |
| <p>Item between groups <br>(browser tab, page / document, page areas - top-level roles)</p> | step in / down | VO + `shift` + `down arrow`  |
|                                                                                             | step out / up  | VO + `shift` + `up arrow`    |
|                                                                                             | forward        | VO + `shift` + `right arrow` |
|                                                                                             | backward       | VO + `shift` + `left arrow`  |
| follow the link                                                                             |                | VO + `space`                 |

{% hint style="info" %}
**Note:** navigation with TAB button is independent of any Screen Readers and used for navigation between only interactive elements.
{% endhint %}

## Handling with keyboard  mouse events (A)

Each mouse event has a keyboard equivalent (see in the table below).

There can be no interaction operation that only works with the mouse (typically for hover). E.g.:

* drop-down menu (whether css or js)
* tooltip
* drag-and-drop

### Keyboard events for mouse events

| mouse event | keyboard event |
| ----------- | -------------- |
| mousedown   | keydown        |
| mouseup     | keyup          |
| click       | keypress       |
| mouseover   | focus          |
| mouseout    | blur           |

## Form and link elements (A)

All form and link elements can be focused interactive elements so they can be controlled with a keyboard.

However, each of these elements has a different role and works a little differently.

For a list of such items and examples, see the Guide link!

It is important that if you modify the original HTML elements for formatting purposes, you also provide keyboard control for them!

### ****:blue\_book:**Guides**

{% embed url="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/html/H91.html" %}

## The (light)switch element (A)

The lightswitch or in short: switch element is a special version of checkbox element: explicitly show two state: (mostly) on/off.

Because it needs two labels, we should use \<button>element  with `role="switch"` instead of `<input type="checkbox">`.

We must use use JS for `<button>` elements; we can use the `aria-checked` property to check the state of the button.

We must handle at least  the state with JavaScript.

{% code lineNumbers="true" %}
```html
<span>off</span>
<button
    role="switch"
    aria-checked="false"
    id="speakerPower"
    class="switch"
    aria-label="Speaker Power off"
>
    <span class="accessibility visually-hidden">Speaker Power</span>
    <span class="switch__slider"></span>
</button>
<span>on</span>
```
{% endcode %}

## Popup (A)

### The popup button

* `<button>` element or at least `role="push button",`
* Click to open popup with JS (no need to listen to a separate keyboard event)

### The outer wrapper element

The modal may consist of several wrapper elements, for the most outer element:

* default `aria-hidden="true"`, `false` when opened (back to `true` when closed)
* If there is a header element, connect it here with `aria-labelledby`, if there is no `aria-label`.

### The inner wrapper element

To the internal modal wrapper that contains the actual content:

* get `tabindex="0"` and `.focus()` when opening the popup
* `tabindex="-1"` when closing popup (so we'll be inside the popup, we don't have to tab all the way to get here)

### The close button

* preferably a separate button on it
* be sure to close `Esc`
* must use a `<button>` element too or at least an element with `role="push button"`
* if the button is not text (e.g. image or `X` character), give it an `aria-label="close"` property

{% hint style="info" %}
Before opening the popup, save where you were in the DOM so that you can return to it when you close the popup.
{% endhint %}

### :blue\_book:Guide + working example

{% embed url="https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2014/09/making-modal-windows-better-for-everyone/" %}

{% embed url="https://codepen.io/scottohara/pen/zYjWYj" %}
The working popup demo
{% endembed %}



****
