# 🕓 2.2 Enough Time

We need to give everyone enough time to read and use the content. Here are two typical problematic areas:

1. (automatic switching) slider
2. public content for only a while

## :blue\_book:**Guides**

{% embed url="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/quickref/?versions=2.2#enough-time" %}
Guideline 2.2 – Enough Time
{% endembed %}

## Adjustable timing (A-AAA)

Wherever there is only a fixed amount of time for something, the user must be notified in advance and given the opportunity to change it:

* For a multi-page form, provide a checkbox on the first page that allows the user to enable a longer session or turn off the time limit.
* For users who cannot access a specified time limit, they can turn it off with a checkbox; e.g. if a news listing is updated every 10 minutes, he can turn off this update and update it manually with a button.
* Give users not fast enough to have at least 10x as much time to respond. For example, in an online booking system, 1 minute is provided for each step, this time can be multiplied.
* Before a time limit expires, the user must be notified at least 1 minute in advance; and this can be extended by the user.
* If the content moves by itself (e.g. slider, short news scrolling to the side, or the page scrolls down) you can slow down, stop, or start over.
* Content that disappears by itself can be brought back somehow. **(AAA)**
* In the event of a session expiration, ensure that the user’s already entered data is not lost; this data to us max. We need to store it for 20 hours and notify the user (until then, we have time to respond). **(AAA)**
* The user can even turn off the timed functions completely. **(AAA)**
