# 🔎 1.4 Distinguishable

Help users differentiate between page elements:

* What belongs together form a unit of content
* What is content and what is background (contrast :black\_circle:)
* Distinguish between similar shades that have a separate meaning (colors :art:)
* Controllability of sounds :control\_knobs:
* Font size adjustability :abc:

## :blue\_book:**Guides**

{% embed url="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/quickref/?versions=2.2#distinguishable" %}
Guideline 1.4 – Distinguishable
{% endembed %}

## Use of color (A)

We cannot use color alone to communicate information, to distinguish it!

In addition to color, use text distinction / marking.

In the case of a form label, the required fields are not only marked with a red asterisk (<mark style="color:red;">`*`</mark>), but after them they are written in brackets: <mark style="color:red;">`*`</mark>`(required)`.

Let's not just distinguish an intertext link by color (it is no coincidence that the default appearance is blue + underlining).

However, if we only distinguish an element from its surroundings by color, it must have a contrast ratio of at least 3:1!

In addition to text, the use of color also applies to images and patterns (eg diagrams, map markers).

When choosing colors, also consider color blinds.

## Focus state (A)

In CSS, don't forget to use the `:focus` state (and don't disable it in any way!)

When navigation is not done with the mouse, the focus status can be indicated when the user has touched an item / area.

Unlike the hover or active state, this has primarily a non-visual role.

`:focus` ! = `:hover` \
In any case, we indicate differently when an item is in focus.

{% code title=":focus and :focus + label" lineNumbers="true" %}
```html
<head>
    <style type="text/css">
        input.text:focus { background-color: #7FFF00; color: #000; }
        input[type=checkbox]:focus + label,
        input[type=radio]:focus + label { background-color: #FF6; color: #000; }
    </style>
</head>

<body>
    <form method="post" action="form.php">
        <label for="name">Name: </label>
        <input class="text" type="text" name="name" id="name">
        
        <input type="radio" name="sex" value="male" id="sm" />
        <label for="sm">Male</label>
        
        <input type="radio" name="sex" value="female" id="sf" />
        <label for="sf">Female</label>
    </form>
</body>
```
{% endcode %}

{% hint style="info" %}
**Hint:** If the default `:focus` state is annoying, you can use the `:focus-visible` too. Nowadays browsers use this state for focus by default. In this case the focus state style will be only visible if the user navigates via keyboard.&#x20;
{% endhint %}

## Automatic audio playback (A)

After performing the operation of the interaction elements, we play a sound of up to 3 seconds, with which we can indicate e.g.:

* the page has loaded
* form submitted successfully.

The sound must stop on its own.

The sound should not be confused with the content elements of the page.

The sound should not be confused with the feedback from the screen reader.

The sound should not conflict with background music and other sounds, but it is best not to use background music.

Such a sound can be a fanfare or even a welcome text.

## Contrast ratio (AA)

The ratio of text / foreground color to background color.

### **Minimum contrast ratios**

<table><thead><tr><th width="344">Case</th><th width="91">Ratio</th><th>Notes</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>larger texts</td><td>3:1</td><td>if not bold and at least 18px<br>if bold and at least 14px</td></tr><tr><td>smaller texts</td><td>4.5:1</td><td>if not bold and less than 18px<br>if bold and and less than 14px</td></tr><tr><td>in logos and decorative texts</td><td>n/a</td><td>the contrast ratio can be ignored!</td></tr><tr><td>if you are writing text on the wallpaper</td><td>7:1</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>

By providing a UI or a browser plugin, the user can override the default colors; you can choose from a variety of predefined styles with higher contrast ratios.

## Text size (AA)

Use techniques available in all browsers to double the size of text (200% zoom)

Increasing the size of the text should not be to the detriment of the structure of the page (do not protrude text from the window or clipping elements)

To scale the text freely wherever possible, do not use px, but use relative units instead: em, rem and%.

Provide a UI that allows the user to choose from predefined text sizes.

Use image text for decorative purposes only **(AAA)**.

## Page Element Distinction (AAA)

Help us to differentiate between the different elements of the page:

* more pronounced text size differences,
* with different background colors,
* with borders,
* using larger spaces.

## Reflow (AA)

Responsive layout that adapts nicely to the client device and fills all available space properly (no elements hang out and no unnecessary empty space left).

Use Flexbox and CSS Grid techniques.

Do not use a sticky header / footer at all resolutions unless there is enough space left for the content.

The recalculation of the layout includes the variability of the font size.

